.TH CPT-CONTRIB 1 2020-04-04 "CARBS LINUX" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
cpt utilities
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not for a single program, but for multiple
utilities. Programs are explained in their own sections. They
are listed alphabetically.
.SH CPT-CAT
.B cpt-cat
<pkg> [file] [file]

Concatanates a package's files inside the system database. If no file is
specified, it looks for \fBbuild\fR, \fBdepends\fR, \fBsources\fR, and
\fBversion\fR.
.SH CPT-CHBUILD
.B cpt-chbuild

cpt-chbuild, creates a temporary rootfs, and chroots into it.

If it doesn't already exist, cpt-chbuild downloads the rootfs tarball to
your cache directory and extracts it into a \fBcarbs-chroot\fR directory.

It then copies the chroot to a temporary directory, and runs cpt-chroot
to it. It removes the temporary chroot after the user exits.
.SH CPT-CHROOT
.B cpt-chroot
<directory>

Mounts the required devices to the given directory, copies /etc/resolv.conf
from host, and chroots into the given directory. Cleans up after exit.
.SH CPT-DEPENDS
.B cpt-depends
<pkg>

Checks the dependencies of an installed package.
.SH CPT-EXPORT
.B cpt-export
<pkg>

Exports a package tarball of an installed package.
.SH CPT-FORK
.B cpt-fork
<pkg>

Copies the repository directory of the given package to the current working
directory.
.SH CPT-LINK
.B cpt-link
[file] [file]

Links files from a package in the repository. It looks for the package by
the directory name, but this can be overriden by getting a PKG environment
value.

.IP \fBExample:\fR
.nf
$ cpt-fork git
forked package to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git
$ cd git
$ cpt-link checksums version sources
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/version to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/version
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/sources to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/sources
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/checksums to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/checksums
.fi
.PP
.SH CPT-MANIFEST
.B cpt-manifest
<pkg>

Prints the manifest file.
.SH CPT-MANIFEST-TREE
.B cpt-manifest-tree
<pkg>

Prints the manifest file in a tree view.
.SH CPT-NEW
.B cpt-new
<name> [version] [sources]

Creates a boilerplate CPT package.
.SH CPT-OUTDATED
.B cpt-outdated

Checks \fIrepology.org\fR to see if any installed packages are outdated. This
can be used to check if personal packages are outdated.
.SH CPT-OWNS
.B cpt-owns
<file>

Checks which package has installed the given file.
.SH CPT-REPODEPENDS
.B cpt-repodepends
<pkg>

Prints the dependencies of the given package as they are defined in the repository.
.SH CPT-RESET
.B cpt-reset

Removes all packages except the base packages.
.SH CPT-REVDEPENDS
.B cpt-revdepends
<pkg>

Prints the packages that depend on the given package. (Reverse dependencies)
.SH CPT-SIZE
.B cpt-size
<pkg>

Prints the given package's size, and its individual files.
.SH CPT-WHICH
.B cpt-which
<pkg>

A \fIwhich\fR-like utility for CPT packages.
.SH SEE ALSO
cpt(1)
