.TH KISS-CONTRIB 1 2020-04-04 "CARBS LINUX" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
kiss utilities
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not for a single program, but for multiple
utilities. Programs are explained in their own sections. They
are listed alphabetically.
.SH KISS-CARGO-URLGEN
.B kiss-cargo-urlgen
[pkg+ver] [pkg+ver]

Creates a list of static cargo urls which can be added to the \fBsources\fR
file of a \fIRust\fR package. It takes arguments as the package name, plus
sign, and the version number.
.SH KISS-CARGOLOCK-URLGEN
.B kiss-cargolock-urlgen
<Cargo.lock file>

Does the same as \fBkiss-cargo-urlgen\fR, but gets the package and version
information from a \fICargo.lock\fR file.
.SH KISS-CAT
.B kiss-cat
<pkg> [file] [file]

Concatanates a package's files inside the system database. If no file is
specified, it looks for \fBbuild\fR, \fBdepends\fR, \fBsources\fR, and
\fBversion\fR.
.SH KISS-CHANGELOG
.B kiss-changelog
<pkg>

Shows a git log of the specified package in an oneline format
.SH KISS-CHBUILD
.B kiss-chbuild

kiss-chbuild, creates a temporary rootfs, and chroots into it.

If it doesn't already exist, kiss-chbuild downloads the rootfs tarball to
your cache directory and extracts it into a \fBcarbs-chroot\fR directory.

It then copies the chroot to a temporary directory, and runs kiss-chroot
to it. It removes the temporary chroot after the user exits.
.SH KISS-CHROOT
.B kiss-chroot
<directory>

Mounts the required devices to the given directory, copies /etc/resolv.conf
from host, and chroots into the given directory. Cleans up after exit.
.SH KISS-DEPENDS
.B kiss-depends
<pkg>

Checks the dependencies of an installed package.
.SH KISS-DEPENDSFINDER
.B kiss-depends-finder
<pkg>

Finds the missing dependencies of packages by checking linked libraries/files.
.SH KISS-EXPORT
.B kiss-export
<pkg>

Exports a package tarball of an installed package.
.SH KISS-FORK
.B kiss-fork
<pkg>

Copies the repository directory of the given package to the current working
directory.
.SH KISS-LINK
.B kiss-link
[file] [file]

Links files from a package in the repository. It looks for the package by
the directory name, but this can be overriden by getting a PKG environment
value.

.IP \fBExample:\fR
.nf
$ kiss-fork git
forked package to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git
$ cd git
$ kiss-link checksums version sources
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/version to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/version
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/sources to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/sources
linked /home/cem/.local/repositories/main/core/git/checksums to /home/cem/.local/repositories/overrides/git/checksums
.fi
.PP
.SH KISS-MAINTAINER
.B kiss-maintainer
<pkg>

Checks repository commit information of the given package to find out
the maintainer of the package.
.SH KISS-MANIFEST
.B kiss-manifest
<pkg>

Prints the manifest file.
.SH KISS-MANIFEST-TREE
.B kiss-manifest-tree
<pkg>

Prints the manifest file in a tree view.
.SH KISS-NEW
.B kiss-new
<name> [version] [sources]

Creates a boilerplate KISS package.
.SH KISS-ORPHANS
.B kiss-orphans

Shows orphaned packages. These packages do not have any dependent packages
installed and can be removed.
.SH KISS-OUTDATED
.B kiss-outdated

Checks \fIrepology.org\fR to see if any installed packages are outdated. This
can be used to check if personal packages are outdated.
.SH KISS-OWNS
.B kiss-owns
<file>

Checks which package has installed the given file.
.SH KISS-READLINK
.B kiss-readlink
<file>

A 'readlink -f' replacement to be used inside the package manager.
.SH KISS-REPODEPENDS
.B kiss-repodepends
<pkg>

Prints the dependencies of the given package as they are defined in the repository.
.SH KISS-RESET
.B kiss-reset

Removes all packages except the base packages.
.SH KISS-REVDEPENDS
.B kiss-revdepends
<pkg>

Prints the packages that depend on the given package. (Reverse dependencies)
.SH KISS-SIZE
.B kiss-size
<pkg>

Prints the given package's size, and its individual files.
.SH KISS-STAT
.B kiss-stat
<file>

Outputs the owner name of a file/directory
.SH KISS-WHICH
.B kiss-which
<pkg>

A \fIwhich\fR-like utility for KISS packages.
.SH SEE ALSO
kiss(1)
